# Instacart Consumer Insights
Instacart stakeholders are particularly interested in understanding the diversity of customers in their database, along with their purchasing behaviors. They aim to target different customer segments with tailored marketing campaigns to evaluate their impact on product sales.

## Objective
The goal of this project was to perform an initial exploratory data analysis to uncover insights and recommend strategies for improving market segmentation within the Instacart platform. 

## Key Questions
1. What are the busiest days of the week and hours of the day for placing orders?
2. Are there specific times of day when customers tend to spend more money? 
3. Can simple price range groupings be established? 
4. Are certain types of products more popular than others (based on order frequency)?
5. What are the different customer types and how do their ordering behaviors differ?
    - What is the distribution of users in terms of brand loyalty?
    - Are there differences in ordering habits based on customers' loyalty status?
    - Are there differences in ordering habits based on customers' region?
    - Is there a relationship between age and family status in terms of ordering habits?
    - What customer classifications can be inferred from the demographic data?
    - Are there other meaningful differences among customer groups?

## Data
The datasets used for this analysis contain information about Instacart orders, products, departments and customers.

**Primary Dataset:**					
_“The Instacart Online Grocery Shopping Dataset 2017”_, accessed via [Kaggle](www.instacart.com/datasets/grocery-shopping-2017) on [date].

_Note: This dataset must be downloaded manually due to file size. It is not included in this repository._										

**Supplementary Dataset:**					
Customer data provided by CareerFoundry	

## Tools
The analysis was performed using **Python** with the following libraries:
- **Pandas**: data analysis and manipulation
- **Numpy**: numerical operations
- **OS**: interaction with the operating system
- **Seaborn**:  data visualizations
- **Matplotlib**: data visualizations
- **Scipy**: scientific and statistical calculations

## Folders 
The project files are organized as follows: 
01. **Project Management**- contains the [Instacart Project Brief](./01%20Project%20Management/instacart_project_brief.pdf). 
02. **Data**- contains: 
- [Original Data (CareerFoundry)](./02%20Data/Original%20Data/customers.csv): supplementary customer data. _Note: The primary Instacart dataset is not included in this repository due to size restrictions._ 
- The 'Prepared Data' folders is also not included due to size constraints, but it can be generated by running the scripts in the [**Scripts**](./03%20Scripts/) folder. 
03. **Scripts**- Jupyter Notebooks used in the analysis.
04. **Analysis**- includes the various [Visualizations](./04%20Analysis/Visualizations/).
05. **Sent to Client**- contains the [Final Report](./05%20Sent%20to%20client/Instacart_final_report.xlsx) for stakeholders.

## Scripts
This folder includes a series of Jupyter Notebooks that document each step of the analysis process. Each script focuses on a specific task.
- [01 Descriptive Analysis](./03%20Scripts/01%20IC%20Data%20import%20and%20descriptive%20analysis.ipynb)
- [02 Data Wrangling and Subsetting](./03%20Scripts/02%20IC%20Data%20wrangling%20and%20subsetting.ipynb)
- [03 Data Consistency Checks](./03%20Scripts/03%20IC%20Data%20consistency%20check.ipynb)
- 04 Data combination [Part 1](./03%20Scripts/04.1%20IC%20Combining%20and%20exporting%20data.ipynb), [Part 2](./03%20Scripts/04.2%20IC%20Combining%20and%20exporting%20data.ipynb)
- [05 Data Derivation](./03%20Scripts/05%20IC%20Deriving%20new%20variables.ipynb)
- [06 Data Grouping and Aggregation](./03%20Scripts/06%20IC%20Grouping%20and%20aggregating%20variables.ipynb)
- 07 Data Visualizations [Part 1](./03%20Scripts/07.1%20IC%20Data%20visualizations.ipynb), [Part 2](./03%20Scripts/07.2%20IC%20Data%20visualizations.ipynb), [Part 3](./03%20Scripts/07.3%20IC%20data%20Visualizations.ipynb)
- 08 Data Analysis and Insights [Part 1](./03%20Scripts/08.1%20IC%20Data%20analysis%20and%20insights.ipynb), [Part 2](./03%20Scripts/08.2%20IC%20Data%20analysis%20and%20insights.ipynb), [Part 3](./03%20Scripts/08.3%20IC%20Data%20analysis%20and%20insights.ipynb)

## Executing the code
To run the analysis clone the repository and execute the Jupyter notebook (.ipynb) files using **JupyterLab**, **Jupyter Notebook**, or any compatible environment.

## Report
You can view the final report prepared for Instacart stakeholders here: [Download final report (Excel)](./05%20Sent%20to%20client/Instacart_final_report.xlsx)
This report includes an overview of the population flow, data consistency checks, wrangling steps, column derivations, visualizations and recommendations based on the findings of this analysis. 